 over East Egg: her cynicism, boredom, and dishonesty are at sharp odds with her wealth and beauty. As with the Buchanans’ marriage, Jordan’s surface glamour covers up an inner emptiness.

Read more about why Tom brings up race so often.

Gatsby stands in stark contrast to the denizens of East Egg. Though Nick does not yet know the green light’s origin, nor what it represents for Gatsby, the inner yearning visible in Gatsby’s posture and his emotional surrender to it make him seem almost the opposite of the sarcastic Ivy League set at the Buchanans’. Gatsby is a mysterious figure for Nick, since Nick knows neither his motives, nor the source of his wealth, nor his history, and the object of his yearning remains as remote and nebulous as the green light toward which he reaches.

Read more about the symbolism of the green light.

The relationship between geography and social values is an important motif in The Great Gatsby. Each setting in the novel corresponds to a particular thematic idea or character type. This first chapter introduces two of the most important locales, East Egg and West Egg. Though each is home to fabulous wealth, and though they are separated only by a eeding, taste, aristocracy, and leisure, while West Egg represents ostentation, garishness, and the flashy manners of the new rich. East Egg is associated with the Buchanans and the monotony of their inherited social position, while West Egg is associated with Gatsby’s gaudy mansion and the inner drive behind his self-made fortune. The unworkable intersection of the two Eggs in the romance between Gatsby and Daisy will serve as the fault line of catastrophe.

Read more about the setting of The Great Gatsby.

Next section
Chapter 2

Test your knowledge
Take the Chapter 1 Quick Quiz 


Take a study break
Every Shakespeare Play Summed Up in a Quote from The Office

Take a study break
Every Book on Your English Syllabus, Summed Up in Marvel Quotes
Full text: A Doll's House
PLUS
Notes
See All Notes

Add Note with SparkNotes PLUS
The Great Gatsby
Add your thoughts right here!
Popular pages: The Great Gatsby
Chapter 1
SUMMARY
Full Book Summary
SUMMARY
Full Book Analysis
SUMMARY
Jay Gatsby
CHARACTERS
Themes
LITERARY DEVICES
The American Dream
QUOTES
Take a Study Break

Every Shakespeare Play Summed Up in a Quote from The Office

Every Book on Your English Syllabus, Summed Up in Marvel Quotes

A Roundup of the Funniest Great Gatsby Memes You'll Ever See

QUIZ: How Many of These Literary Jeopardy! Questions Can You Answer Correctly?
Sign up for our latest news and updates!
By entering your email address you agree to receive emails from SparkNotes and verify that you are over the age of 13. You can view our Privacy Policy here. Unsubscribe from our emails at any time.
First Name
Last Name
Email
Sign Up
The #1 FREE study site for students
Most Popular No Fear Shakespeare Literature Guides Other Subjects SparkNotes Blog
More Help About Help Contact Us How to Cite SparkNotes How to Write Literary Analysis Advertise
Find Us On
 

owered By TrackerdslogoFull text: A Doll's House
Nick is unlike his West Egg neighbors; whereas they lack social connections and aristocratic pedigrees, Nick graduated from Yale and has many connections on East Egg. One night, he drives out to East Egg to have dinner with his cousin Daisy and her husband, Tom Buchanan, a former member of Nick’s social club at Yale. Tom, a powerful figure dressed in riding clothes, greets Nick on the porch. Inside, Daisy lounges on a couch with her friend Jordan Baker, a competitive golfer who yawns as though bored by her surroundings.

Tom tries to interest the others in a book called The Rise of the Colored Empires by a man named Goddard. The book espouses racist, white-supremacist attitudes that Tom seems to find convincing. Daisy teases Tom about the book but is interrupted when Tom leaves the room to take a phone call. Daisy follows him hurriedly, and Jordan tells Nick that the call is from Tom’s lover in New York.

After an awkward dinner, the party breaks up. Jordan wants to go to bed because she has a golf tournament the next day. As Nick leaves, Tom and Daisy hint that they wou
